=title USP: Unix time and the Ruby Time class
=timestamp Sep 24, 2011 at 2:28 AM
=description Eric explains Unix time concepts and how time related functionality is accessed from Ruby.
=entry

The Unix epoch is defined as January 1, 1970, 00:00:00 UTC (Coordinated Universal Time[1]).  Unix systems return the time in seconds as a signed integer relative to the Unix epoch.  Negative numbers are interpreted as dates before the Unix epoch.

Using seconds (and fractions of a second) to represent time allows application authors to rely on arithmetic rather than specialized functions for calculating time intervals.

File systems expose timestamps for all files in Unix time with varying degrees of accuracy and granularity.  The Ruby File and File::Stat classes can support timestamps with sub-second granularity on some systems.

Modern kernels do not know nor care about timezones.  Conversions from UTC to the local timezone (and vice versa) are done in user space[2]. Different processes running concurrently on the same machine do not necessarily share the same local timezone.

h3. Ruby Time class

The Ruby Time class includes methods for reading the system time and allows converting from an Integer (seconds since the epoch) to a Ruby Time object.

Ruby Time objects have a timezone attached to them, but remember this is a user space construct.

h3. Time.now / gettimeofday(2) / clock_gettime(2)

gettimeofday(2) is the commonly available system call for reading the Unix time with (up to) microsecond resolution.  On some systems, clock_gettime(2) may be used for nanosecond resolution[3].

Time.now will return the current time as a Time object taking into account the timezone of the current process (in user space).  Ruby 1.9 may use clock_gettime(2) internally if available, but fall back to
gettimeofday(2) to retrieve the system time.

h3. Time#tv_sec / Time#tv_usec / Time#tv_nsec

These accessors allow access to the underlying values returned by gettimeofday(2) or clock_gettime(2) as Integers.  For systems without nanosecond resolution, Time#tv_nsec may just be the value of Time#tv_usec multiplied by 1000.

h3. Time.at - converts from Unix time to a Time object

If you have the number of seconds (and maybe microseconds) as integer seconds since the Unix epoch, you can convert that into a Ruby Time object using the Time.at class method:

<pre name="code" class="ruby">
       Time.at(seconds[, microseconds ])
</pre>

This is is useful if you encounter a Unix timestamp anywhere but want to have a Ruby Time object.  The local timezone is attached to the created object.

There is no underlying syscall needed for this, this conversion can be performed entirely in user space (although it may require memory allocation).

h3. Process timezone

The "TZ" environment variable controls the timezone for a given process, and thus the timezone attached to a Ruby Time object.  If "TZ" is unset, the timezone of the process is implementation-defined.

h3. Time#utc

If your process is not running under UTC, you may wish to convert Time objects to UTC with this method.

h3. Setting system time

Ruby does not provide methods to change the system time.  Changing system time typically requires administrator (root) privileges and few applications (especially high-level ones) need to change the system time.  For machines with network access, system time is commonly synchronized via NTP and gradually adjusted via adjtime(3) and/or non-portable syscalls.

h3. Monotonic clocks

Some systems support a monotonic clock which is not adjustable (even by the administrator).  A monotonic clock is useful for maintaining consistent timing and scheduling across system time changes.

Ruby currently (as of 1.9.3) does not provide access to the monotonic clock.  However, Ruby implementations may use the monotonic clock internally for timing (via clock_gettime(2)) and recording time differences.

h3. Avoiding system calls

You may notice the lack of gettimeofday(2) or clock_gettime(2) syscalls if you're tracing syscalls.  This is because C libraries can work with the kernel to optimize away the syscalls for gettimeofday(2) and clock_gettime(2).  These implementations may trade accuracy for speed, but may be disabled (by the administrator) if accuracy is more important (than speed).

fn1. One should know UTC is not exactly the same as Greenwich Mean Time (GMT)

fn2. Timezone information is usually on (regular) files, so it may require syscalls to read those files.

fn3. You're not guaranteed this level of accuracy is supported by your kernel nor your hardware.  Consult your operating system and hardware documentation for more information.

??License: "GPLv3":http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.txt (or later, at the discretion of Eric Wong)??
